Azure Architecture guidance (#6140)
Particular/docs.particular.net: architecture/messaging.md

---
title: Messaging
summary: Messaging concepts for building distributed systems
reviewed: 2023-07-18
callsToAction: ['solution-architect']
---

>  Messaging is typically used for reliable communication across processes (also referred to as "components"). It is typically used to communicate between components within a system, as opposed to integration-based communication which is often used to communicate with external systems.
> 
> The principles and patterns underlying queued messaging are decades old and battle-tested through countless technological shifts.

Author: @andreasohlund how about:

```suggestion
Messaging is typically used for communication and coordination between various components wihtin a system. Messaging plays a crucial role enabling flexible, robust, and scalable inter-process coordination required to build decoupled and reliable distributed architectures. The principles and patterns underlying messaging are decades old and battle-tested through countless technological shifts.
```

### Messaging versus RPC

It's quite easy to build an application and get it working using [remote procedure call (RPC)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call) techniques like web services (ASMX or WCF), HTTP API (ASP.NET WebAPI) or WebSockets (SignalR). However, scalability and fault tolerance are inherently hindered when using synchronous, blocking calls. Scaling up with more hardware usually has little effect.

Asynchronous communication using messages enables loose coupling between applications and makes communication more reliable because two or more components do not have to be running at the same time. There are no blocking calls with asynchronous, one-way messaging. Common, transient errors can be resolved automatically with retries, and it's easy to recover from failures that require manual intervention. Above all, even when a part of the system fails, no data is lost.

> To learn more about the relationship between messaging and reliable, scalable, and highly available systems, watch the webinar about [handling failures with NServiceBus](https://particular.net/webinars/handling-failures-with-nservicebus) and other [webinar and presentations](https://particular.net/videos).

Author: moved to additional resources at the bottom. This was copied from the original source.
